.Dd January 07, 2022
.Dt jswhois 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm jswhois 
.Nd whois lookup results in json format
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl RQVjlv
.Op Fl h Ar host
.Op Fl p Ar port
.Ar domain
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool performs
.Xr whois 1
lookups and prints results in JSON format.
.Pp
Since the WHOIS protocol notoriously does not include
a specification of the WHOIS data's format or how
recursive discovery should be handled, the results --
much like the results of the normal
.Xr whois 1
command -- tend to vary significantly.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width h_host_
.It Fl Q
Do a quick lookup;
.Nm
will not attempt to follow referrals to other whois
servers.
This is the default if a server is explicitly
specified via the
.Fl h
flag.
See also the
.Fl R
option.
.It Fl R
Do a recursive lookup;
.Nm
will attempt to follow referrals to other whois
servers.
This is the default if
.Fl h
is not specified.
See also the
.Fl Q
option.
.It Fl V
Print version information and exit.
.It Fl h Ar host
Use the specified host instead of the default
(whois.iana.org).
.It Fl l
Only print results from the last WHOIS server queried.
.It Fl p Ar port
Connect to the whois server on
.Ar port.
If this option is not specified,
.Nm
defaults to port 43.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
Can be specified multiple times.
.El
.Sh DETAILS
WHOIS information is notoriously unpredictably
structured and hard to parse.
In order to process WHOIS data with even a shred of
hope of not getting lost in terrible regular
expressions and shell pipelines and yet without
relying on proprietary APIs
.Nm
will attempt to reformat the text output in a coherent
JSON object.
.Pp
The query for any domain will always begin at
\'whois.iana.org\' and then recurse as per the data
encountered.
The resulting JSON document will then contain nested
structures indexed by the name of the WHOIS server in
question.
.Pp
Since the data is fundamentally unstructured, attempts
to stuff them into JSON formatting is made as outlined
below:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
repeated fields are turned into a list
.It
a chain of WHOIS servers queried is added to the top
object
.Ed
.Sh EXAMPLES
To display the WHOIS information for the domain
\'netmeister.org\':
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ jswhois netmeister.org | jq
{
  "query": "netmeister.org",
  "chain": [
    "whois.iana.org",
    "whois.pir.org",
    "whois.gandi.net"
  ],
  "whois.iana.org": {
    "domain": "ORG"
    "organisation": {
      "name": "Public Interest Registry (PIR)",
      "address": [
        "11911 Freedom Drive 10th Floor,",
        "Suite 1000",
        "Reston, VA 20190",
        "United States"
      ]
    },
    "contact": [ {
      "name": "administrative",
      ...
    }, ... ]
  }
  "whois.pir.org": {
    "Domain Name": "NETMEISTER.ORG",
    ...
  },
  "whois.gandi.net": {
    "Domain Name": "netmeister.org",
    ...
  }
}
.Ed
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std 
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr whois 1 ,
.Xr jq 1
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was originally written by
.An Jan Schaumann
.Aq jschauma@netmeister.org
in December 2021.
.Sh BUGS
Please file bugs and feature requests by emailing the author.
